Over the last decade African savannah elephants (Loxodonta africana) has been on a steep decline in population across multiple parts of range states in Africa, due to poaching and habitat restrictions. Nonetheless, in southern Africa, such as Namibia, these savannah elephants have seen an increase in population growth with a growth rate of approximately 5.4% in the last 25 years. One of these areas are the Northern Highlands of north-west Namibia. In combination with conservation laws, improved water access and anti-poach measurement, and their preferred vegetation being available in the northern Highlands, the area has seen a steadily increase in savannah Elephants who were otherwise comfortably residing in Etosha National Park. However, this increase in population with a healthy growth rate does not come without a cost. The savannah elephants are expanding their range beyond the specified protected areas, into multiple types of land such as communal conservancies and commercial farmlands, especially in the Kunene region where the expansion into the farmlands has caused extensive human-elephant conflicts (HEC). While the expansion of elephants contributes to an overall livestock disease control issue and fencing damage at farmlands, they also provide economic benefits to landowners due to tourism and consumptive use opportunities. Due to the expansion of elephant populations beyond protected areas, appropriate monitoring strategies are essential. Elephant tracking is commonly conducted using GPS collars for fine-scale individual movement assessment, or aerial surveillance for large-scale population monitoring, with more recent developments incorporating camera traps to assess localised movements and grouping patterns. However, to understand individual elephant behaviour and movement, GPS collaring remains the most effective way of providing continuous movement data. Collars provide high temporal resolution that records positions at frequent intervals and providing important details of the elephant’s movement paths and habitat use. For example, in a study tracking eight collared elephants demonstrated that most of the elephants did not move exclusively within a communal, concession area or national park. The study also showed economic impact in fence reparations, in that the elephants made 1300 fence breaches during the 12-month study period. While collaring is great for high resolution data, they also pose problems. The collaring of an elephant is an logistical expensive process that also requires precise coordination with multiple teams and fields, that both can be invasive and dangerous for humans and elephants. This is an important reason why extensive preparations to ensure safety and a smooth operation flow is required for the collaring procedure.

Elephant procedure:
The procedure begins with a veterinarian stationed in a helicopter, who must estimate the elephant’s weight from the air to prepare a precise cocktail of potent opioids. These substances, often thousands of times more powerful than morphine, are necessary for the safe immobilisation of the elephants. Once the animal is successfully darted, the helicopter pilot remains airborne to manage the rest of the herd. As MH (Morgan Hauptfleisch) notes, this is a critical safety measure:” The pilot keeps the herd at bay to prevent them from trying to ‘rescue’ the elephant, which could endanger the ground team.” Upon reaching the immobilised elephant, the ground team initiates a time sensitive multitasking phase. While the veterinarian monitors vital signs like heart rate and respiration, the research team performs a rapid biological assessment. This includes activating the GPS collar by removing its magnet and collecting blood, dung, and morphometric data such as tusk dimensions. Efficiency during this window is vital for the animal’s welfare.
MH explains:” The efficiency of this coordination is critical. By performing multiple tasks simultaneously, the team can significantly reduce the ‘dart-to-down-time’ of the elephant, which is also healthier for the animal.” A primary physiological concern during sedation is the animal’s posture. To prevent the elephant from collapsing onto its chest, which can lead to an obstructed airway, the team uses vehicle-mounted slings attached to a leg or tusk to roll the animal onto its side. To ensure the airway remains open, a branch is often placed in the snout to hold it open. The procedure concludes with the use of a reversal drug, followed by an immediate evacuation of the site. Because the reversal drug acts fast, the elephant often wakes up disoriented and defensive, posing a significant risk of attack to any nearby personnel or vehicles.

Roles:
A successful collaring operation relies on a multi disciplinary team, where each role requires specific expertise to minimise the induction time and ensure safety:
• Veterinarian: The veterinarian begins the process in the helicopter. Their role is to estimate the elephant’s weight and prepare a precise drug cocktail - a powerful opioid, thousands of times stronger than morphine. Once the elephant is darted from the helicopter, the veterinarian moves to the ground to monitor the animal’s vitals (heart rate and respiration) throughout the procedure, primarily using a stethoscope. This monitoring is critical, as if the drug dosage is insufficient, the animal may move or wake prematurely, creating a dangerous environment. If the elephant seems to not do well, the drugs are immediately reversed to wake the animal.
• Helicopter pilot: Responsible for flying to the darting location and subsequently herd management. Their primary task post darting is to act as a barrier between the darted elephant and the rest of the herd to prevent them from attempting a rescue, which would endanger the ground team.
• Scientists: Tasked with the technical setup of the GPS collar - removing the magnet from the collar to trigger recording and the rapid collection of morphometric data and biological samples. They collect extensive data for other research, including dung samples for parasite study, tusk measurements, girth, and height. Blood samples are taken from the large veins behind the ear, as these are easily accessible and part of the animal’s natural cooling system.
• Ground support team: Assistants who handle the physical manipulation of the animal, including using slings from the ground vehicle to ensure the elephant is on its side and preparing the site by removing intruding bushes or pouring water to prevent the animal from overheating. They must ensure the elephant does not collapse on its chest, which can suppress breathing. A key task is placing a branch in the snout to hold the airway open during sedation. Efficiency is vital because the animal is under significant strain, as its breathing and heart rate are artificially lowered by the drugs. The ideal window for the procedure is under 20 minutes and should generally not exceed 30 minutes.
As the first step is darting the elephant, this includes finding the elephant from a heli-
copter or from a car. When the elephant has been darted the elephant has the tendency to run away. The next step is keeping up with the elephant; this has been done by the air-team from the helicopter or plane guides the ground team to where the elephant might end up be. The first important task for when the team arrives is to place the elephant trunk free from any obtruding obstacles and put a branch in the trunk to keep it open. The next part is done synchronously with the other task but is the collaring part. Here they would remove the old collar if there any and then put on the new one. If they have trouble to get the collar under the elephant head, people 4-5 people might use a rope to move the head to make putting the collar on possible, with the” director” fastening the collar by bolting it. The tasks can either be done by one person multiple.

The tasks include:
• Remove intruding bushes (If bushes or branches are close to the elephant and are an obstacle for the personnel, they remove these)
• Measure biometric data (They measure the length of tusks and other parts of the elephant)
• Pour water (The elephant can overheat during this process, which is therefore impor- tant to pour water over it to reduce the chances of this)
• Tend to wounds (The elephant could have sustained injuries during this or before this which is then tended to)
• Check vitals (The vitals of the elephant is checked to make sure everything is okay, which is done using a stethoscope)
• Take blood samples (One video shows the blood sample being taken from behind the ear and wetting the area to find the blood veins)
After doing all the necessary tasks the veterinarian gives a reversal drug which will wakeup the elephant. All other personnel are required to clear the area. The number of people that are working directly on the elephant are not that many, about 4-5.
A big problem with the collaring process is when the elephant is not laying down by itself.
Due to the elephant weighing well over three tons, the low number of personnel can not move the elephant. Here more people are required and even a whole car to get the elephant to lay down on its side. 

GPS Tracking Collars and Geo-fences:
GPS (global positioning system) tracking collars are a highly accurate satellite-based navigation and location system that are fitted onto elephants to monitor their movements in real-time across landscapes. As a migratory species, elephants spend most of their time outside protected areas, meaning some are most likely to either cross through or near villages and farms. Increase in human population has prompted the development of human settlements and roads that completely block or restrict passage through important wildlife migratory routes (Okello and Kiringe, 2004). Save the Elephants (STE) use GPS-tracking equipment to understand elephant lives, decisions and needs. STE founder Iain Douglas-Hamilton was the first to track elephants using radio collars (1995) and STE remains at the forefront of tracking technology. Collars contain advanced GPS satellite tracking devices that allow scientists and wildlife rangers to monitor, in real time, when and where individual animals are moving across the landscape.
When collared elephants are approaching farmlands/community areas or are in any danger, rangers are able to inform rapid response units and ground patrol to make their way to the site and attempt to safely scare the elephant away, using various deterrent methods such as noise and chilli bombs. The need to understand patterns of elephant movement and interactions with farmlands allows us to compile effective mitigation methods to reduce levels of conflict and promote tolerance of elephants in rural communities. Manolo (male elephant) near a village around Lake 

In and around Samburu Game Reserve in Northern Kenya, elephants often come in contact with herders and their livestock at water points such as rivers. Collared elephants around Samburu are monitored to prevent them from coming in conflict with humans, as some clashes can be fatal to both elephant and people. 
Collars also help to understand important elephant corridors and inform the community to be careful. A notorious male elephant named  
The collar consists of a VHF transmitter and a battery, a counterweight and a belt.
Tim, an iconic tomato-loving male elephant from Amboseli grew a taste for farmed foods and so he was a good target for collaring. His tracking data provided insight into his crop-raiding behaviour and enabled conservation partners to improve rangers patrol strategies so that villagers can live more harmoniously with elephants. 

Safety Around the Dart Area - Blue Spray Paint:
Project partners in Namibia have highlighted that the area where the dart enters the elephant is highly toxic to humans. For this reason, the dart site may be marked with blue spray paint to show that it must not be touched.

Components of the collar
Accelerometer provides immediate data on elephant activity, e.g., when the elephant suddenly streaks/runs, is moving slowly, and when it is not moving at all and is perhaps resting. The collar goes around the elephant’s neck with the tracking device resting on top, where the signal will be strongest, while the weight hangs between the two ends of the belt under the elephant’s chin, to keep the collar in balance. The outer shell of the equipment is made of resin which provides a tough protection to prevent all the equipment inside from breaking. Collar designs have evolved after many years of experience in the field. A satellite collar can last up to 3-4 years after which it is replaced or removed. Collars do not affect the lifestyle of elephants. Collar designs vary depending on the type of manufacturer.

How GPS collars work? 
GPS system gives information about the location/position of the elephant, typically every hour (time could be adjusted). Transmitters in the collar send a signal to a satellite, which sends information to a Central database, or to an application on the phone  known as WildTracks & Earth-Ranger. If the collar fails, a directional antenna is used to detect signals emitted by VHF (Very High Frequency) Transmitters inside the collar. A  “beep-beep-beep” sound is produced in the radio as the elephant gets closer to the receiver.
The signal can sometimes be distorted by obstacles in the landscape, like hills/ mountains, gullies, dense vegetation, etc. Collars have radio transmitters with different frequencies, so that each elephant can be located using a unique frequency.
If the elephants approach human settlements, apps exist that will send an alert to rangers, allowing them to respond before an incident takes place. Elephants can be tracked by foot, car or aircrafts.

Geo-fencing is a feature that uses GPS or radio frequency identification (RFID) to create virtual geographical boundaries on a device. These 
boundaries are called Geo-fences. There are no actual physical barriers on the ground, so people and elephants cannot see them with their eyes. Geo-fences can be virtually “marked” around reserve fences, local villages, farmlands etc.
However promising, this technology comes with challenges: Collars are only be fitted on elephants by persons of higher authorities and sensitive data can only be accessed by them, as this data can be mishandled with the wrong intentions. Advanced knowledge and training are needed to use this technology. Collar disfunctions can occur and wear out every few years so they need to be replaced. Sometimes communities think placing a collar on an elephant implies ownership and responsibility for the havoc it causes. Collaring operations are both labour-extensive and is expensive to fit a collar on an elephant which is why not all elephants have a collar fitted on them. Collaring involves immobilizing the elephant which may be risky to the elephant.